So now that I've given you an
overview of completable futures
and shown how they address
some of the limitations
with classic futures,
let's give an overview
of the completable future API.
And we're really going to talk
here at a high level about
how these different methods--
and there are lots of them
as we'll see in a moment--
can be grouped together
in a way that's
a little easier to understand.
Well, first of all, why
do we need to do this?
It turns out that
if you take a look
at the completable future
class, the public API
has over 60 methods,
and these methods
keep growing with every
new release of Java.
So there's a lot of
methods, and a lot of them
are a little bit intimidating
to understand at first glance.
If you were to take a look
at the implementation,
if you get the source code and
peek at the way it's actually
implemented under
the hood, you'll
be even more flabbergasted
because there's
about two dozen different
nested classes that
are really convoluted
and complicated
and do lots of work.
So even though the
completable future framework
has a lot of methods
in its public API,
it's really implementing
the facade pattern
to hide you from even more
complex details lurking
in the implementation of
the completable futures
framework, which is really quite
daunting to the uninitiated.
So therefore it
really helps to have
a bird's eye view of this
highly method intensive class.
So we want to see
things, step back
and look at it from a distance,
and see how it all shapes out.
And I found this classic photo--
this is from one of the Apollo
missions.
It's called Earthrise.
It was a picture of the
earth from the moon-- well,
from the lunar module
circling the moon.
And if you take a
close look at it,
it looks like what
we're showing here.
It's showing the completion
stage method part of the earth
if you will.
Some of the completable
future methods are very basic.
In fact, they're
really not much more
than what you get from the
underlying Java future API.
So this API is basically
the Java futures
plus a few enhancements just
to make it a little better.
This is only slightly better
than the conventional future
API, so obviously, if that's
all we got, we just stop.
There'd be no point in
talking any further.
What's interesting, of course,
are the more advanced methods.
And these are the ones
that are really cool.
These include factory methods,
completion stage methods,
exception methods,
which are really
a variant of completion
stage methods,
and arbitrary arity methods.
So what I'd like to do
here is just give you
a little sense of what
these methods are.
We're not going to talk about
them in gory detail yet.
That will appear in
upcoming lessons.
So the first category of
methods we want to talk about--
or really the good
starting point--
and these are the
factory methods.
And the factory methods
are used to initiate
asynchronous one-way or two-way
computations without using
threads explicitly.
And as we'll see here,
there's four of these methods,
and they have a bunch of
interesting properties
that we'll talk about in more
detail as we get further along.
The most important one
or most important ones
are the methods
called supply async.
And what these
methods do is they
help to make asynchronous
programs more elastic
by leveraging a pool
of worker threads.
So this is, again,
just thinking back
to the reactive
programming principles,
the factory methods can be used
to make programs more elastic
by having things run
in a pool of threads.
The next category
of methods, which
are by far the vast majority
of the methods or about 2/3
of the methods in the
completable future API,
are the so-called
completion stage methods.
And these methods chained
together dependent actions
that perform asynchronous result
processing when asynchronous
computations finish.
So when a computation finishes,
then the completion stage
methods will arrange to
automatically dispatch
these dependent actions,
which can do something
and then typically
kick off something else
to run asynchronously.
Something else you can do with
completion stage methods that's
very important is composition.
So you can have an
operation, a completion stage
method that only
gets triggered when
two previous stages finish.
So you can compose the
results of two complete-- two
previous stages.
These methods come from the
completion stage interface.
And I strongly recommend
you take a look
at the completion
stage interface
and read the documentation.
It's very enlightening to
explain what these methods do
and how they work.
Naturally we'll talk
about them, too,
but it's good as a reference.
The completion
stage methods help
to make programs more responsive
by not blocking the user code,
not blocking the client
code, the caller code.
So you can basically have things
that go run in the background,
and you don't have
to bother the user
or you'd have to
bother the client
until after the computations
are completely done.
Yet another category
of methods are
these so-called
arbitrary arity methods.
That's a funny name,
arbitrary arity.
Arity is just a fancy word that
means number of parameters.
So we talk about binary,
that's a two-arity method,
takes two things.
You might have a unary method.
It takes one parameter.
So an arbitrary arity method
will take essentially an array
of parameters.
And what it does
is it can be used
to process completable
futures in bulk
by combining
multiple completable
futures into a single completed
a future that will be triggered
only when all the computations
in the multiple completable
futures are done or when
the first one is done.
And this approach also makes
programs more responsive
by not blocking user code.
So you can go ahead and start
a whole bunch of computations
to run asynchronously, put
their completable futures
into an array, pass that array
to one of the arbitrary arity
methods, and then get back a
single completable future that
will be triggered when
everything is done
or the first thing is done.
And as you can see, there's
only a handful of these methods.
They're, in fact, two of
them, all of and any of.
And we'll talk more about
their meaning and semantics
and how to program
with them more
conveniently in a later lesson.
And in the final
types of methods
we're going to distinguish here
are called exception methods.
They're actually a variant of
the completion stage methods.
And they are used to handle
exceptional conditions
at runtime.
And there's a bunch of them.
There's not a whole lot.
There's three of them
basically, and they
can be used to basically catch
exceptions and do something
with the exceptions.
Some of the methods can be
used to swallow the exceptions
to keep them from propagating.
Other of the methods can
be used to note something
about the program state,
maybe change the behavior,
maybe swallow them,
maybe not swallow them.
Some of the methods can't
swallow the exceptions.
They just note
something's happen,
and then they continue to
propagate up the chain.
But this is a very
important feature
because it allows us
to handle exceptions
that occur in asynchronous
computations, which
are otherwise difficult to
deal with because the context
in which you started the
asynchronous computation is
typically not where you're going
to be handling the exception.
And that's quite different
from classic Java synchronous
exceptions, which we handle with
conventional try catch blocks
where it, in fact, is a
synchronous situation.
You do a try.
You do a bunch of calls.
If a call throws
an exception, you
catch it synchronously in
the context of the caller.
So the exception methods in
the completable future API
are designed to handle
the asynchronous model
of computation that it supports.
This feature helps to make
programs more resilient
by handling erroneous
computations gracefully or more
specifically handling erroneous
asynchronous computations more
gracefully.
And, of course, just to
round out our mapping
on to the reactive
programming principles
that we've been talking about
on and off throughout these
lessons so far, all of the
methods we've described
are all internally
implemented using
message passing that will
ultimately be connected
to Java's thread pools.
And so this technique helps
make things loosely coupled.
The work can run on any
thread in the thread pool.
It helps to isolate
the processing.
It makes its
location transparent.
You don't know or
don't care what thread
the computation runs in.
You just need to know it ran
and you get a result back
and you do something
with the result.
So this just shows how all
the different API elements
map to specific principles
from the reactive programming
paradigm thereby underscoring
the fact that you can consider
Java completable
futures as a realization
of the reactive
programming model
although by no means
the only realization
available in the Java platform.